[CLOSES] #2022  [Concept Entry] R Matrices. (#2464)
Codecademy/docs: content/r/concepts/matrices/matrices.md

---
Title: 'Matrices'
Description: 'Matrices in R are a fundamental data type used for storing two dimensional tabular data with rows and columns.'
Subjects:
  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Data Science'

> Tags:

Author: Sure will get onto it.

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)
myMatrix2[1, 2] 
# Output: "washington"
```

The whole row can be accessed if by specifying a comma after the number in the bracket:

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)
myMatrix2[1, ] 
# Output: [1] "tokyo"      "washington"
```

The whole column can be accessed if you specify a comma before the number in the bracket:

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)
myMatrix2[, 2] 
# Output: [1] "washington" "paris"     
```
## Accessing Multiple Rows

Multiple rows can be accessed by using the c() function:

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)
myMatrix2[c(1,2),] 
# Output:  	[,1]    [,2]        
# 	  [1,] "tokyo" "washington"
#	  [2,] "delhi" "paris"
```

The `substr()` function extracts a substring from a string:

```r
my_string <- "Hello, World!"
substring <- substr(my_string, start = 1, stop = 5)
# Output: "Hello"
```

## Adding and Removing Rows and Columns

> We may use the cbind() function to add more columns in a Matrix:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cbind() function may be used to add more columns in a Matrix:
```

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)
newmatrix <- cbind(myMatrix2, c("london", "berlin"))
# Print the new matrix

> newmatrix 

Reviewer: We need to show the output.

```

> We use the 'rbind()' function to add more rows in a Matrix:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The 'rbind()' function is used to add more rows in a Matrix:
```

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)
newmatrix <- rbind(myMatrix2, c("Moscow","Brasília","Ottawa"))
# Print the new matrix

> newmatrix 

Reviewer: We need the output.

```

> We may use the 'c()' function to remove rows and columns:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The 'c()' function may be used to remove rows and columns:

```

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)
#Remove the first row and the first column
myMatrix2 <- myMatrix2[-c(1), -c(1)]

> myMatrix2  

Reviewer: Again, we need the output.

```

> ## Check if an Item Exists

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Check if an Item Exists

```
Blank line after header.

> To find out if a specified item is present in a matrix, use the '%in%' operator:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find out if a specified item is present in a matrix, use the `%in%` operator:
```

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)
"delhi" %in% thismatrix 

> "cairo" %in% thismatrix 

Reviewer: Again, missing the output.

```

> ## Dimension and Length of Matrix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Dimension and Length of Matrix

```
Blank line after header.

> The dim() function is used to find the number of rows and columns in a Matrix:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `dim()` function is used to find the number of rows and columns in a matrix:
```

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)
dim(myMatrix2) 

> ```

Reviewer: Output

> The length() function can also be used to find the dimension of a Matrix:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The length() function can also be used to find the dimension of a matrix:
```

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)
length(myMatrix2) 
```

> ## Mathematical Operations on Matrices

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Mathematical Operations on Matrices
```

Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication and Division can also be performed on Matrices in R.

> ```r

Reviewer: We need output for all of these.

# Create two 2x3 matrices.
matrix1 <- matrix(c(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6), nrow = 3)
print(matrix1)
matrix2 <- matrix(c(7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12), nrow = 3)
print(matrix2)
# Add the matrices.
result1 <- matrix1 + matrix2
# Subtract the matrices
result2 <- matrix1 - matrix2
# Multiply the matrices.
result3 <- matrix1 * matrix2
# Divide the matrices
result4 <- matrix1 / matrix2
```

> ## Pro-Tip💡 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Remove this header.

newmatrix 
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
      [,1]     [,2]        
[1,] "tokyo"  "washington"
[2,] "delhi"  "paris"     
[3,] "moscow" "brasília" 
```

The `c()` function may be used to remove rows and columns:

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)

#Remove the first row and the first column
myMatrix2 <- myMatrix2[-c(1), -c(1)]

# Print the matrix
myMatrix2  
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
  [1] "paris" 
```

## Check if an Item Exists

To find out if a specified item is present in a matrix, use the  `%in%` operator:

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)

# Print
"delhi" %in% myMatrix2 
"cairo" %in% myMatrix2 
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
  [1] TRUE
  [1] FALSE 
```

## Dimension and Length of Matrix

The `dim()` function is used to find the number of rows and columns in a matrix:

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)

# Print
dim(myMatrix2) 
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
  [1] 2 2
```

> The `length()` function can also be used to find the dimension of a matrix:

Reviewer: Last one, you're missing output for this example.

Matrices are created using the `matrix()` function, which takes the data elements and dimensions as input parameters. The elements can be numeric, character, logical, or any other data type supported by R. The dimensions of a matrix define the number of rows and columns, allowing for organized storage and efficient computations.

Once created, matrices offer a wide range of operations and functions. Basic arithmetic operations can be performed, such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, on matrices of compatible dimensions. R also provides functions for matrix transposition, subsetting, row and column manipulation, and various matrix algebra operations like determinant calculation, inverse computation, and eigenvalue extraction.

## Syntax

To create a matrix, simply use the `matrix()` method. Here are some examples:

```r
# Create a matrix with 8 values stored in a tabular format with 2 rows and 4 columns
myMatrix <- matrix(c(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8), nrow=2, ncol=4)

# Print the created matrix

> myMatrix

Reviewer 2: many of these examples don't actually call `print`, please update all examples where there is a call

```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
     [,1] [,2] [,3] [,4]
[1,]    1    3    5    7
[2,]    2    4    6    8 
```

> Another example of matrices with string values is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another example with string values:
```

```r
# Create matrix with string values
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)

# Print the created matrix
myMatrix2
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
     [,1]    [,2]        
[1,] "tokyo" "washington"
[2,] "delhi" "paris"   
```

## Access Matrix Items

The matrix items can be accessed by using `[ ]` brackets where the first parameter in the bracket specifies the row-position, while the second specifies the column-position: 

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)

# Print
myMatrix2[1, 2] 
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
"washington"
```

The whole row can be accessed if by specifying a comma after the number in the bracket:

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)

# Print
myMatrix2[1, ] 
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
[1] "tokyo"      "washington"
```

> The whole column can be accessed if you specify a comma before the number in the bracket:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A whole column can be accessed by prefixing the column value with a comma:
```

# Print the new matrix
newmatrix 
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
   [,1]    [,2]         [,3]    
[1,] "tokyo" "washington" "london"
[2,] "delhi" "paris"      "berlin"
```

The `rbind()` function is used to add more rows in a Matrix:

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)
newmatrix <- rbind(myMatrix2, c("moscow", "brasília"))

# Print the new matrix
newmatrix 
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
      [,1]     [,2]        
[1,] "tokyo"  "washington"
[2,] "delhi"  "paris"     
[3,] "moscow" "brasília" 
```

The `c()` function may be used to remove rows and columns:

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)

#Remove the first row and the first column
myMatrix2 <- myMatrix2[-c(1), -c(1)]

# Print the matrix
myMatrix2  
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
  [1] "paris" 
```

## Check if an Item Exists

To find out if a specified item is present in a matrix, use the  `%in%` operator:

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)

> # Print

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Return
```

"delhi" %in% myMatrix2 
"cairo" %in% myMatrix2 
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
  [1] TRUE
  [1] FALSE 
```

> ## Dimension and Length of Matrix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Dimension and Length of a Matrix
```

The `dim()` function is used to find the number of rows and columns in a matrix:

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)

# Print
dim(myMatrix2) 
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
  [1] 2 2
```

The `length()` function can also be used to find the dimension of a matrix:

```r
myMatrix2 <- matrix(c("tokyo", "delhi", "washington", "paris"), nrow = 2, ncol = 2)
length(myMatrix2) 
```

This example results in the following output:

```shell
[1] 4
```

## Mathematical Operations on Matrices

Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication and Division can also be performed on Matrices in R.

```r
# Create two 2x3 matrices.
matrix1 <- matrix(c(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6), nrow = 3)
matrix2 <- matrix(c(7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12), nrow = 3)

> # Add the matrices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Add the matrices
```

result1 <- matrix1 + matrix2

# Subtract the matrices
result2 <- matrix1 - matrix2

> # Multiply the matrices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Multiply the matrices
```
